# Developing an automated machine learning framework for protein classification

## Abstract

Researchers are faced with the constant challenge of determining efficient treatments against medically significant issues, such as cancer and Human Immunodeficiency Virus (HIV), having identified anti-cancer peptides (ACPs) and antibodies as effective candidates, respectively. The persistent increase in biological data, however, makes it tough to maintain its curation up to date. This is where the Machine Learning (ML) approaches have proven useful. This field of Artificial Intelligence (AI) attempts to correlate sample descriptors with a desired output by applying a pipeline which includes data preprocessing, algorithm and model selection, and model evaluation. Different tools and frameworks have greatly assisted ML pipeline implementations, such as is the case with OmniA, an automated ML package, in development by the startup OmniumAI, that allows the implementation of efficient pipelines with minimal user effort. In this work, OmniA was developed, having been added skewness and multicollinearity treatment transformers, as well as a zero-padding transformer for encodings, along with some bug corrections. OmniA was then tested against two ML/Deep Learning (DL) models used in literature: one using a peptide dataset to distinguish ACPs from non-ACPs (binary problem), and the other using an antibody dataset for half maximal inhibitory concentration (IC50) value predictions (regression problem). Code files were prepared to further automate the ML pipelines, using OmniA’s functionalities, for each prediction problem and generate results to be used for comparison in regard to the selected articles. The binary prediction results show that, using only shallow learning models, OmniA was able to produce outstanding results against the ACP740 dataset, surpassing the comparison article’s DL approach, and suffering only when data is more scarce, as is the case with the ACP240 dataset. In regard to the regression problem, by using protein encoding representations, the results completely surpassed those obtained by the comparison article’s neural network (NN) approach. Overall, this study proves that OmniA is perfectly capable of producing precise predictions, doing so in an almost completely automated manner, and setting the foundation for further automation to boost the generation of powerful models for biomedical research.

**Keywords:** automation, OmniA, pipeline, preprocessing, proteins.
